.\"DO NOT REMOVE NH_DATESUB .TH DLB 6 "DATE(%d %B %Y)" NETHACK
.TH DLB 6 "22 January 2022" NETHACK
.\"DO NOT REMOVE NH_DATESUB .ds Nd DATE(%Y)
.ds Nd 2022
.de NB
.ds Nb \\$2
..
.de NR
.ds Nr \\$2
..
.NB $NHDT-Branch: NetHack-3.6.0 $
.NR $NHDT-Revision: 1.7 $
.ds Na Kenneth Lorber
.SH NAME
dlb \- NetHack data librarian
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dlb
{
.B xct
}
[
.B vfIC
]
arguments...
[
.B files...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Dlb
is a file archiving tool in the spirit (and tradition) of tar for
NetHack version 3.1 and higher.  It is used to maintain the
archive files from which NetHack reads special level files and other
read-only information.  Note that like tar the command and option
specifiers are specified as a continuous string and are followed
by any arguments required in the same order as the option specifiers.
.PP
^?ALLDOCS
This facility is optional and may be excluded during NetHack
configuration.
^:
^?DLB
This facility is optional but is included in this NetHack
configuration.
^:
This facility is optional and was excluded from this NetHack
configuration.
^.
^.
.SH COMMANDS
The
.B x
command causes
.I dlb
to extract the contents of the archive into the current directory.
.PP
The
.B c
command causes
.I dlb
to create a new archive from files in the current directory.
.PP
The
.B t
command lists the files in the archive.
.SH OPTIONS AND ARGUMENTS
.DT
.ta \w'f archive\ \ \ 'u
v	verbose output
.br
.sp 1
f archive	specify the archive.  Default if f not specified is
LIBFILE (usually the nhdat file in the playground).
.br
.sp 1
I lfile	specify the file containing the list of files to
put in to or extract from the archive if no files are listed
on the command line.  Default for archive creation if no files
are listed is LIBLISTFILE.
.br
.sp 1
C dir	change directory.  Changes directory before trying to
read any files (including the archive and the lfile).
.br
.SH EXAMPLES
Create the default archive from the default file list:
.br
	dlb c
.sp 1
List the contents of the archive 'foo':
.br
	dlb tf foo
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Kenneth Lorber
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
nethack(6), tar(1)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Not a good tar emulation; - does not mean stdin or stdout.
Should include an optional compression facility.
Not all read-only files for NetHack can be read out of an archive;
examining the source is the only way to know which files can be. 
.SH COPYRIGHT
This file is Copyright (C) \*(Na, \*(Nd for version \*(Nb:\*(Nr.
NetHack may be freely redistributed.  See license for details.
