.\"DO NOT REMOVE NH_DATESUB .TH MAKEDEFS 6 "DATE(%d %B %Y)" NETHACK
.TH MAKEDEFS 6 "22 January 2022" NETHACK
.\"DO NOT REMOVE NH_DATESUB .ds Nd DATE(%Y)
.ds Nd 2022
.de NB
.ds Nb \\$2
..
.de NR
.ds Nr \\$2
..
.NB $NHDT-Branch: NetHack-3.6.0 $
.NR $NHDT-Revision: 1.10 $
.ds Na Kenneth Lorber
.SH NAME
makedefs \- NetHack miscellaneous build-time functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B makedefs
{
.B -o
|
.B -d
|
.B -e
|
.B -m
|
.B -v
|
.B -p
|
.B -q
|
.B -r
|
.B -h
}
.P
.B makedefs --input
.I file
.B --output
.I file
.BI -- command
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Makedefs
is a build-time tool used for a variety of
.BR NetHack (6)
source file creation and modification tasks.  For historical reasons,
.B makedefs
takes two types of command lines.  When invoked with a short option, the
files operated on are determined when
.B makedefs
is compiled.  When invoked with a long option, the
.B --input
and 
.B --output
options are used to specify the files for the
.BI -- command.
Each command is only available in one of the two formats.
.SH SHORT COMMANDS
Upper and lower case are both accepted for the short commands.
.TP
.B -o
Generate
.I onames.h.
.br
.TP
.B -d
Generate
.I data.base.
.br
.TP
.B -e
Generate
.I dungeon.pdf.
The input file
.I dungeon.def
is passed through the
same logic as that used by the
.B --grep
command; see the
.B MDGREP FUNCTIONS
section below for details.
.br
.TP
.B -m
Generate
.I date.h
and
.I options
file. It will read 
.IR dat/gitinfo.txt ,
only if it is present, to obtain 
.B githash=
and 
.B gitbranch=
 info and include related preprocessor #defines in
.I date.h
file.
.br
.TP
.B -p
Generate
.I pm.h
.br
.TP
.B -q
Generate the
.I rumors
file.
.br
.TP
.B -s
Generate the
.I bogusmon
,
.I engrave
and
.IR epitaph files.
.br
.TP
.B -h
Generate the
.B oracles
file.
.br
.SH LONG COMMANDS
.TP
.B --debug
Show debugging output.
.br
.TP
.B --make \fR[\fIcommand\fR]
Execute a short command.  Command is given without preceding dash.
.br
.TP
.BI --input " file"
Specify the input
.I file
for the command (if needed).  If the file is - standard
input is read.
.br
.TP
.BI --output " file"
Specify the output
.I file
for the command (if needed).  If the file is - standard
output is written.
.br
.TP
.B --svs \fR[\fIdelimiter\fR]
Generate a version string to standard output without a trailing newline.
If specified, the delimiter is used between each part of the version string.
.br
.TP
.B --grep
Filter the input
.I file to the output
.IR file .
See the
.B MDGREP FUNCTIONS
section below for information on controlling the filtering operation.
.br
.TP
.B --grep-showvars
Show the name and value for each variable known to the grep option.
.br
.TP
.B --grep-trace
Turn on debug tracing for the grep function (
.B --grep
must be specified as well).
.br
.TP
.BI --grep-define " symbol"
Force the value of
.I symbol
to be "defined."
.I Symbol
must already be known to
.BR makedefs .
.br
.TP
.BI --grep-undef " symbol"
Force the definition of
.I symbol
to be "undefined."
.I Symbol
must already be known to
.BR makedefs .
.SH MDGREP FUNCTIONS
The
.B --grep
command (and certain other commands) filter their input, on a line-by-line
basis, according to control lines embedded in the input and on information
gleaned from the
.BR NetHack (6)
configuration.  This allows certain changes such as embedding platform-specific
documentation into the master documentation files.
.P
Rules:
.RS
.IP - 4
The default conditional state is printing enabled.
.IP - 4
Any line
.I NOT
starting with a caret (^) is either suppressed or passed through unchanged
depending on the current conditional state.
.IP - 4
Any line starting with a caret is a control line; as in C, zero or more spaces
may be embedded in the line almost anywhere (except immediately after the
caret); however the caret must be in column 1.
.IP - 4
Conditionals may be nested.
.IP - 4
.I Makedefs
will exit with an error code if any errors are detected; processing will
continue (if it can) to allow as many errors as possible to be detected.
.IP - 4
Unknown identifiers are treated as both TRUE and as an error.  Note that
.BR --undef " or " #undef
in the
.BR NetHack (6)
configuration are different from unknown.
.RE
.P
Control lines:
.RS
.IP ^^ 4
a line starting with a (single) literal caret
.IP ^#
a comment
.IP ^?\fIID
if the
.I ID
is defined set the conditional state to TRUE
.IP ^!\fIID
if the
.I ID
is not defined set the conditional state to TRUE
.IP ^:
else; invert the conditional state
.IP ^.
end the most recent conditional
.RE
.\".SH EXAMPLES
.SH AUTHOR
The NetHack Development Team
.SH COPYRIGHT
This file is Copyright (C) \*(Na, \*(Nd for version \*(Nb:\*(Nr.
NetHack may be freely redistributed.  See license for details.
