Qt-NetHack issues
-----

Urgent:  if the program crashes on OSX, a dialog box asking the user
whether to [ignore], [report...], or [re-open] will eventually appear
(it's slow).  That should be repressed even if the report choice could
be directed at nethack.org.

Launching Qt nethack as a synchronous subprocess (ie, no trailing '&')
from a Terminal window, changing focus back to that terminal after
NetHack has started, and typing ^C was sending the program into an
endless loop in qt_nhgetch() with repeated messages to stderr
(the terminal) complaining that the event loop is already running.
Triggered by yn_function("Really quit?") in the core.  That situation
has been reduced to a single event loop complaint, so downgraded from
"Urgent", but the prompt is auto-answered with ESC instead of letting
the user respond.

On OSX, if the program is run from nethackdir/nethack rather than from
NetHack.app/Contents/MacOS/nethack (plus having NetHack.app/Contents/
Info.plist containing pertinent information) then the menu bar at the
top of the screen won't accept mouse clicks and the application menu
entry in that menu bar will show as "nethack" (filename) rather than
"NetHack" (intended application name).  The click issue can be worked
around by giving focus to some other application (which will put up
its own menu bar) and then back to nethack (thereby reloading nethack's
menu bar).

Sometimes scrolling a menu leaves the displayed text not matching what
nethack thinks is displayed, so making a selection by mouse click may
occasionally pick the wrong item.  There's usually a visual clue when
this happens.  As long as it's not a pick-one menu, scrolling up and
down or back and worth a few times will usually get things back in
sync, then you can click on the wrong entry to uncheck it and then on
the right entry to check that.  Making a selection by typing its
letter doesn't suffer from this, but isn't always possible (ie, long
menu like 'O's where first 52 items have letters but remainder don't).

On OSX, command+Q while a menu (which has its own key event handler)
is popped up gets ignored.  It should at least close the popup like
ESC and maybe also initiate quitting.

Map column #0, which the core reserves for its own purposes and isn't
intended to be displayed, is displayed (as blank terrain).

3.7 status conditions haven't been implemented.

3.6 status conditions (Stone, Slime, Strngl, Deaf, Lev, Fly, Ride)
have been implemented but need icon artwork (one 40x40 tile for each).

Clicking on window close button pops up a confirmation dialog with
  [  Save and exit  ]  [__Quit_without_saving__]
with the second one highlighted.  Internally they're specified as
"&Save" and "&Quit".  Typing <return> or <space> picks Quit, but
typing 'Q' or 'q' picks Save-and-exit because Alt+Q is expected for
the keyboard shortcut.

The status window can't be resized while hitpointbar is active.
Toggling it off, resizing as desired, then toggling it back on is a
viable workaround.

-----
